---
title: "Ramanujan's Tau Function, Lehmer's Conjecture and Mock Modular Forms"
---
I thought I would kickstart my first mathematical post with my favourite mathematical object - the Ramanujan's tau function. The mathematical legacy of the Indian mathematics genius Srinivasa Ramanujan opened up several broad areas in twentieth century mathematics and is still shaping the mathematical developments of the twenty first century. In this post, we will see two of his works and their relation - the tau function and mock modular forms. This post is intended for anyone with a basic background in real and complex analysis.  
#### Introduction

Let us begin by defining the Ramanujan's tau function which was introducded by Ramanujan in his seminal $1916$ paper called "On Certain Arithmetical Functions". Consider $q$ as a formal variable and consider the infinite product 
\begin{equation}\label{1} \Delta(q)=q\prod_{n=1}^{\infty}(1-q^n)^{24}. \end{equation} The function $\Delta(q)$ is called the _discriminant function_. One should first argue that this definition makes sense. Indeed, the convergence criteria in analysis says that a product $\prod a_n$ converges $($absolutely$)$ if and only if the sum $\sum \log{a_n}$ converges $($absolutely$)$ and $\sum \log{(1+a_n)}$ converges $($absolutely$)$ if and only if $\sum a_n$ converges $($absolutely$)$. Now let $q$ be a complex number so that $\log{q}$ makes sense with $\log$ being the principal branch of complex logarithm. One can now immediately see that the infinite product $\Delta(q)$ in \eqref{1} converges absolutely if $|q| < 1$. Since the infinite product converges absolutely, we can also rearrange the terms in the product so that we can collect all powers of $q^n$ together and write:\begin{equation}\label{2} \Delta(q):=\sum_{n=1}^{\infty}\tau(n)q^n. \end{equation} The formal equality in \eqref{2} defines the Ramanujan's tau function $\tau(n).$ It is clear that $\tau(n)$ is always an integer. Some values of $\tau(n)$ are given in the table below:

| $n$ | $\tau(n)$    | $n$| $\tau(n)$      | $n$ | $\tau(n)$      |
|-----|--------------|-----|---------------|-----|----------------|
|$1$  |           $1$|$11$ |      $534612$ |$21$ |      $-4219488$|
|$2$  |         $-24$|$12$ |     $-370944$ |$22$ |     $-12830688$|
|$3$  |         $252$|$13$ |     $-577738$ |$23$ |      $18643272$|
|$4$  |       $-1472$|$14$ |      $401856$ |$24$ |      $21288960$|
|$5$  |        $4830$|$15$ |     $1217160$ |$25$ |     $-25499225$|
|$6$  |      $-6048$ |$16$ |      $987136$ |$26$ |      $13865712$|
|$7$  |      $-16744$|$17$ |    $-6905934$ |$27$ |     $-73279080$|
|$8$  |      $84480$ |$18$ |     $2727432$ |$28$ |      $24647168$|
|$9$  |     $-113643$|$19$ |    $10661420$ |$29$ |     $128406630$|
|$10$ |     $-115920$|$20$ |    $-7109760$ |$30$ |     $-29211840$|  


Ramanujan observed several properties of $\tau(n)$. For example, observe that \\[\tau(2)=-24,~\tau(3)=252\quad \text{and}\quad \tau(6)=-6048=\tau(2)\tau(3).\\]  Infact Ramanujan made the following three conjectures:

**Ramanujan's Conjectures:** The tau function satisfies the following:  
(a) For $m,n\in\mathbb{Z}$ with gcd$(m,n)=1$, we have \\[\tau(mn)=\tau(m)\tau(n).\\]  (b) For a prime number $p$ and $m\geq 1$, we have \\[\tau(p^{m+1})=\tau(p)\tau(p^m)-p^{11}\tau(p^{m-1}).\\]   (c) For a prime number $p$, we have $\mid\tau(p)\mid\leq 2p^{\frac{11}{2}}.$  

These properties are quite surprising and mysterious. Why would a function defined in such an unusual way satisfy such relations? This remained a mystery until Erich Hecke in $1937$ came up with a systemetic theory, now called Hecke theory, to study more general functions of this form. All of the three Ramanujan's conjectures are now theorems. The first and second  conjectures were proved by Mordell in $1917$ and later generalised to more general functions by Erich Hecke in $1937$. The third conjecture remained unresolved until $1974$ when Deligne proved it as a consequence of his proof of the Weil's conjectures. To date, there is no other way to prove the third Ramanujan's conjecture. The tau function satisfies many other interesting properties. For example note that the values of $\tau(p)$ in the table above is even when $p$ (here and elsewhere) is prime. Infact one can prove that $\tau(p)$ is **even for every prime $p.$** In terms of modular arithmetic, we write $a\equiv b (\bmod c)$ if $c$ divides $b-a$ and we say that $a$ is congruent to $b$ mod $c$. With this notation, the following conguences hold for the tau function: 
  
(1) $\tau(p)\equiv 1+p^3(\bmod 2^5)$  
(2) $\tau(p)\equiv 1+p(\bmod 3)$  
(3) $\tau(p)\equiv p+p^{10}(\bmod 5^2)$  
(4) $\tau(p)\equiv p+p^{4}(\bmod 7)$  
(5) $\tau(p)\equiv 1+p^{11}(\bmod 691)$  

Many more congurences are true for the tau function but this is not the main aim of this post. There is one other conjecture which goes by the name **Lehmer's conjecture**  and first appeared in a paper by D.H. Lehmer and it is still a conjecture.

**Lehmer's Conjecture:** For every integer $n>0,$ we have that $\tau(n)\neq 0.$  

Such an innocuous statement but notoriously difficult to prove. From the first two Ramanujan's conjectures, it can be shown that Lehmer's conjecture is equivalent to the nonvanishing of $\tau(p)$ for every prime. This conjecture has been verified for $n < 816212624008487344127999$. There are some other observations. For example Lehmer himself proved that if $n_0$ is the least integer such that $\tau(n_0)=0$ then $n_0$ must be a prime. Secondly, one easily observe using the second congruence above that $\tau(p)\neq 0$ for every prime $p\equiv 1(\bmod 3).$ So to prove Lehmer's conjecture, we just need to show that $\tau(p)$ does not vanish for primes $p\equiv 2(\bmod 3).$ Many other partial results are known but the conjecture remains unresolved. Infact there is a much more stronger conjecture due to Atkin and Serre. 

**Atkin-Serre Conjecture:** For any $\varepsilon>0$ and prime $p$, there is a constant $C(\varepsilon)>0$ such that $\mid\tau(p)\mid >C(\varepsilon)p^{\frac{9}{2}-\varepsilon}.$

There is no clue about this conjecture and we leave it undisturbed here. We will now look at the systematic framework to study the discriminat function.  
#### Modular Forms

The theory of modular forms occupies the central position in number theory in the sense that it finds applications ranging from geometry, topology, discrete mathematics, representation theory to theoretical physics. Roughly speaking, modular forms are holomorphic functions on the upper half plane $\mathbb{H}:=\\{z=x+iy\in\mathbb{C}:y>0\\}$ which satisfy certain transformation property with respect to the _modular group_ $\mathrm{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z})$  defined below and satisfy certain growth condition. Let us make this precise now. Define the following set of matrices   
\\[ \mathrm{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z}):=\left\\{\begin{pmatrix}a&b \\\ c&d\end{pmatrix}:a,b,c,d\in\mathbb{Z}, ad-bc=1\right\\}. \\] One can easily check that $\mathrm{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z})$ is a group with respect to matrix multiplication. This group acts on $\mathbb{H}$ via linear fractional transformations as follows: for $z\in \mathbb{H}$ and $\gamma=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}a&b\\\ c&d\end{smallmatrix}\right)$, we have   
\\[\gamma z=\frac{az+b}{cz+d}.\\]  We can easily check that this is a group action. We now define modular forms precisely.  

**Definition** $($Modular Form$)$: A function $f:\mathbb{H}\longrightarrow \mathbb{C}$ is called a modular form of weight $k\in\mathbb{Z}$ on $\mathrm{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z})$ if  
(i) $f$ is holomorphic.  
(ii) $f\left(\frac{az+b}{cz+d}\right)=(cz+d)^kf(z)$ for all $\left(\begin{smallmatrix}a&b\\\ c&d\end{smallmatrix}\right)\in \mathrm{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z})$ and $z\in\mathbb{H}$.  
(iii) $f(z)$ is bounded as $z\to i\infty.$   

The set of all modular forms of weight $k$ is denoted by $M_k$. Using (i) for the matrix $T=\left(\begin{smallmatrix}1&1\\\ 0&1\end{smallmatrix}\right)$ we get $f(z+1)=f(z)$. Using this periodicity and (iii) of the above definition, one can show that any modular form can be expanded in a Fourier series as   
\begin{equation}f(z)=\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}a_f(n)q^n,\quad\text{where}\quad q=e^{2\pi iz}.\end{equation} The complex numbers $a_f(n)$ are called the Fourier coefficients of the modular form $f.$ If $a_f(0)=0$ then $f$ is called a **cusp form**. One can also have a more general definition, if we only require that the Fourier expansion have only finitely many negative powers of $q$. Such forms are called **weakly holomorphic modular forms** and the set of all such forms is denoted by $M_k^!$. We will have more to say about these forms in the next section. The first examples of modular forms are given by **Eisenstein series**. For $k\geq 4$ and even, put  
\begin{equation}\label{4}E_k(z)=\sum_{(m,n)\in\mathbb{Z}^2\backslash\\{(0,0)\\}}\frac{1}{(mz+n)^k},\quad z\in\mathbb{H}.\end{equation} We can prove that $E_k(z)$ is a modular form of weight $k$. Their Fourier expansion is given by  
\begin{equation}\label{5}E_k(z)=1-\frac{2k}{B_k}\sum_{n=1}^{\infty}\sigma_{k-1}(n)q^n,\end{equation}
 where $B_k$ are _Bernoulli numbers_ defined by 
 \\[ \frac{x}{e^x-1}=\sum_{k=0}^{\infty}B_k\frac{x^k}{k!} \\]  and $\sigma_k(n)=\sum_{d|n}d^k$ is the $k$th divisor sum (here $d|n$ means that $d$ divides $n$). Infact it turns out that all modular forms can be expressed in terms of Eisenstein series. One can prove that the space of modular forms of weight $k$ is a finite-dimensional vector space  with a basis $\\{E_4^{\alpha}E_6^{\beta}: 4\alpha+6\beta=k,\alpha,\beta\in\mathbb{Z}, \alpha,\beta\geq 0\\}$. Note that this basis allows only even $k$. Infact standard results in modular forms show that there are no modular forms of negative weight, odd weight and weight $2$. Notice also that $E_2$ as defined in \eqref{5} makes perfect sense. Infact one can prove that the expressions for $E_2$ in \eqref{4} and \eqref{5} agree and for every $\left(\begin{smallmatrix}
a&b\\\c&d\end{smallmatrix}\right)\in \mathrm{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z})$, $E_2$ satisfies the following transformation property:  
 \begin{equation}\label{6}E_2\left(\frac{a\tau+b}{c\tau+d}\right)=(c\tau+d)^2E_2(\tau)+\frac{6c(c\tau+d)}{\pi i}.\end{equation}  This in particular implies that $E_2$ is not a modular form as expected. Later we will see that $E_2$ is an example of what are called **mock modular forms**.   

Okay, after all that jargon we come to the point. Consider $q\in\mathbb{C}$ as a function of $z\in\mathbb{H}$ given by $q=e^{2\pi i z}.$ Then $|q| < 1$ and hence the discriminant function can be considered as a holomrophic function on $\mathbb{H}.$ It turns out that $($not so difficult to prove$)$  
\begin{equation}\label{7}\Delta(z)=\frac{E_4^3(z)-E_6^2(z)}{1728}.\end{equation} Remarkable! Isn't it. \eqref{7} implies that $\Delta(z)$ transforms like a modular form of weight $12.$ Moreover since the constant term in the Fourier expansion of $E_k$ is $1$, thus $\Delta(z)$ is a cusp form of weight $12$.  But this post is about Lehmer's conjecture and it seems that we have lost it somewhere in discussing the theory of modular forms. But one thing that the theory gives us is an expression for the tau function. In the theory of modular forms, the second most important construction $($only after Eisenstein series$)$ are the **Poincaré series**. The Poincaré series are cusp forms and span the space of cusp forms. The construction also gives us explicit Fourier expansion of the Poincaré series. Moreover it is known that the space of cusp forms of weight $12$ is one dimensional. Thus the Poincaré series of weight $12$ and the discriminant function are multiples and the constant of proportionality is determined by comparing the first Fourier coefficient of the Poincaré series. The upshot of all this mumbo-jumbo is that we have the following expression for the tau function: 
\begin{equation}\label{8}\tau(n)=\frac{2\pi n^{\frac{11}{2}}}{\beta_{\Delta}}\sum_{c>0}\frac{K(1,n,c)}{c}J_{11}\left(\frac{4\pi\sqrt{n}}{c}\right).\end{equation} where $\beta_{\Delta}=2.840...($the constant of multiplicity$)$ is a constant, $K(m,n,c)$ for $m,n\in\mathbb{Z}$ is the **Kloosterman sum** defined by 
\\[ K(m, n ; c):=\sum_{d=1}^{c-1} e^{2\pi i\left(\frac{m \bar{d}+n d}{c}\right)} \\]  with $0\leq \bar{d}\leq c-1$ defined by $d\bar{d}\equiv 1(\bmod c)$ and $J_{\ell}$ is the order $\ell$ Bessel function of the first kind $($I hope you have seen it in differential equations$)$. Does this expression say anything about the Lehmer's conjecture. Unfortunately no. Why did we discuss modular forms then? Hopefully, it turns out that the elder brothers of modular forms have a part to play in Lehmer's conjecture as we will see now. We will now discuss mock modular forms and as I promised, I will put $E_2$ in perspective.   
#### Harmonic Maass Forms and Mock Modular Forms 
 
Harmonic Maass forms and mock modular forms have their origin in Ramanujan's last deathbed letter to G.H. Hardy in $1920$. In this enigmatic letter, Ramanujan listed $22$ functions which he called **mock theta functions**. The transformation properties and the precise definitions did not appear in literature until recently in $2002$, Zwegers came up with a systematic framework to study them. Ramanujan's mock theta functions are now known to be mock modular forms which we will describe in this section. Let us first discuss the general philosophy of mock modular forms. Suppose that we have a function which is holomorphic but does not have the transformation property as modular forms. If we can find a function $($nonholomorphic in general$)$ such that the sum of these two functions has correct transformation property then we say that our original function is a mock modular form. The sum which is called the **completion** of the mock modular form is essentially nonholomorphic but has correct transformation properties. Such forms are called **nonholomorphic modular forms**. This completion is usually called a harmonic Maass form. So much of words, some maths now. Let $z=x+iy$.  I hope you remember the holomorphic and antiholomorphic derivatives from complex analysis. Never mind, I will remind  it here.  
\\[\frac{\partial}{\partial z}=\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{\partial}{\partial x}-i\frac{\partial}{\partial y}\right);\quad \frac{\partial}{\partial \bar{z}}=\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{\partial}{\partial x}+i\frac{\partial}{\partial y}\right). \\]
We now define the **hyperperbolic Laplacian** of weight $k\in\mathbb{R}$ as follows:
\\[ \Delta_k= -y^2\left(\frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2}+\frac{\partial^2}{\partial y^2}\right)+iky\left(\frac{\partial}{\partial x}+i\frac{\partial}{\partial y}\right)=-4y^2\frac{\partial}{\partial z}\frac{\partial}{\partial \bar{z}}+2iky\frac{\partial}{\partial \bar{z}}.\\]  Let us now define harmonic Maass forms.  
**Definition** $($Harmonic Maass Form$)$: A real-analytic function $f:\mathbb{H}\longrightarrow\mathbb{C}$ is called a harmonic Maass form of weight $k\in\mathbb{Z}$ if the following conditions are satisfied:  
(a) $f\left(\frac{az+b}{cz+d}\right)=(cz+d)^kf(z)$ for all $\left(\begin{smallmatrix}a&b\\\ c&d\end{smallmatrix}\right)\in \mathrm{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z})$ and $z\in\mathbb{H}$.  
(b) $\Delta_k(f)=0.$   
(c) There exists a polynomial $P_f$ in variable $q^{-1}$ $($remember $q=e^{2\pi iz})$ such that $f(z)-P_f(z)=O(e^{-\varepsilon y})$ for some $\varepsilon > 0$ as $y\to \infty.$ If we just have $f(z)=O(e^{\varepsilon y})$ as $y\to\infty$ then $f$ is called a harmonic Maass form of **manageable growth**.    

The third condition is technical. Let me try to explain it a bit with an example. Consider a function $f$ given by the following Fourier series:  
\\[f(z)=\sum_{n=1}^{N}\frac{a_f(n)}{q^n}+\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}a_f(n)q^n,\\]  where $N$ is a positive integer. Note that as $|q^{-1}| = e^{2\pi y}\to \infty$ as $y\to \infty.$ This in particular implies that $|f(z)|$ grows exponentially as $y\to \infty$. Now suppose we consider the polynomial $P_f(z)=\sum_{n=1}^{N}\frac{a_f(n)}{q^n}.$ Then we have  
\\[f(z)-P_f(z)=\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}a_f(n)q^n.\\]  Thus now we only have positive powers of $q$ in the expansion of $f(z)-P_f(z)$ which also implies that $f(z)-P_f(z)$ is at bounded as $y\to\infty.$ But if $f$ is of manageable growth then it may not be possible to cancel the growth by subtracting any polynomial in $q^{-1}$. This is the precise meaning of the third condition. The space of harmonic Maass forms of manageable growth is denoted by $H_k^!$ and the space of harmonic Maass forms is denoted by $H_k$. Ofcourse $H_k\subset H_k^!$.   
What else can we say about a harmonic Maass form. You can guess it. We have a Fourier expansion but slightly complicated $($and don't ask me for a proof here$)$: for $k\neq 1$, harmonic Maass forms of manageable growth have Fourier expansion of the shape
\begin{equation}\label{9} f(z)=f(x+iy)=\sum_{n=n_0}^{\infty}c_f^{+}(n)q^n+c_f^-(0)y^{1-k}+\sum_{n=-\infty}^{n_0'}c_f^{-}(n)\Gamma(1-k,-4\pi ny)q^n, \end{equation} 
where $\Gamma(s,z)$ is the incomplete gamma function defined as 
\\[\Gamma(s,z)=\int\limits_z^{\infty}e^{-t}t^s\frac{dt}{t}\\]  and $n_0,n_0'$ are integers $($possibly negative, positive respectively$)$. Note that the Fourier expansion can be cannonically broken into two parts: We call 
\\[f^+(z)=\sum_{n=n_0}^{\infty}c_f^{+}(n)q^n\\]  the **holomorphic part** of $f$ and 
\\[f^-(z)=c_f^{-}(0)y^{1-k}+\sum_{n=-\infty}^{n_0'}c_f^{-}(n)\Gamma(1-k,-4\pi ny)q^n\\]  the **nonholomorphic part** of $f$. If $f$ satisfies the first growth condition of $(c)$ in above definition then $c_f^{-}(0)=0$ and $n_{0}' < 0.$ Observe that any weakly holomorphic modular form $($remember the name from previous section$)$ is a trivial example of harmonic Maass form with the nonholomorphic part being zero and the holomorphic part being the weakly holomorphic modular form itself. Thus we have the following sequence of containments: \\[M_k\subset M_k^!\subset H_k\subset H_k^!.\\] There are two operators on harmonic Maass forms which deserve mentioning $($Infact, I need them to convince you that mock modular forms are important for Lehmer's conjecture$)$. These two operators are defined in a more uniform way  but I will define them in a way which will make our discussions easier to follow. I will keep the discusion elementary $($which gives me the right to omit proofs$)$. Define the **shadow map** by 
\\[\xi_k:H_k^!\longrightarrow M_{2-k}^!\\]\begin{equation} \xi_k(f(z))=\xi_k(f^-(z))=(1-k)\overline{c_f^-(0)}-(4\pi)^{1-k}\sum_{n>0}\overline{c_f^-(-n)}n^{1-k}q^n,\end{equation}  where $f$ is given as in \eqref{9} and $\overline{c_f^-(-n)}$ denotes complex conjugation. The image $\xi_k(f)$ is called the **shadow** of $f$ $($funny name. funnier ahead!$)$. One easily sees that if $f\in H_k$ then the shadow of $f$ is a cusp form. It turns out that this map is surjective $($but not injective in general$)$. This means that we can associate a harmonic Maass form of appropriate weight to every weakly holomorphic modular form. This is not it. When $k$ is a **negative integer**, we can define another operator called **Bol operator**. It is defined as follows: $D^{1-k}:H_k^!\longrightarrow M_{2-k}^!$, where $D=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\frac{\partial}{\partial z}.$ One can show that if $f\in H_k^!$ is given by its Fourier expansion as in \eqref{9} then we have
\begin{equation}\label{11} D^{1-k}(f)(z)=-(4\pi)^{k-1}(1-k)!c_f^-(0)+\sum_{n=n_0}^{\infty}c_f^+(n)n^{1-k}q^n.\end{equation}
But unlike $\xi_k$, the Bol operator is not surjective. The image $D(f)$ of $f$ under the Bol operator is called the **ghost** of $f$. So we have described what needs to be described. Let us now define the term in the heading. 
 
**Definition** $($Mock Modular Form$)$: A mock modular form of weight $(2-k)$ is the holomorphic part $f^+$ of a harmonic Maass form of weight $(2-k)$ for which $f^-$ is non trivial. The weakly holomorphic modular form $\xi_{2-k}(f)$ is called the **shadow** of the mock modular form $f^+$ and the harmonic Maass form $f$ is called the **completion** of $f^+$.
  
Phew! Finally we have reached the point after a long tiring discussion. I will end this section by showing that $E_2$ is a mock modular form. Indeed if we put      \\[\mathcal{E}_2(z)=E_2(z)-\frac{3}{\pi y},\\]  then using some simple manipulations and \eqref{6} we can show that $\mathcal{E}_2$ satisfies (a) in the definition of modular forms. We need to make sure that $\Delta_2(\mathcal{E}_2)=0$ which again is a simple computation. Finally we can check that $\xi_2(\mathcal{E}_2)=\frac{3}{\pi}.$ This shows that $E_2$ is a mock modular form of weight $2$ with shadow $3/\pi.$ 
#### Mock Modular Form Whose Shadow Is The Discriminant Function  

Now comes the climax of the story. Since $\xi_k$ is a surjective map, there exists (not unique) a mock modular form whose image is the discriminant function. One such mock modular form is 
\begin{equation} M_{\Delta}(z)=\sum_{n=-1}^{\infty}a_{\Delta}(n)q^n=\frac{39916800}{q}-\frac{2615348736000}{691}+\sum_{n=1}^{\infty}a_{\Delta}(n)q^n,\end{equation} where  \begin{equation} \label{13}a_{\Delta}(n)=-(2 \pi)11! n^{-\frac{11}{2}} \cdot \sum_{c=1}^{\infty} \frac{K(-1, n, c)}{c} \cdot I_{11}\left(\frac{4 \pi \sqrt{n}}{c}\right),\quad n>0, \end{equation}  with $I_{\ell}$ being the $\ell$th Bessel function of the second kind. The shadow of the mock modular form $M_{\Delta}$ is $11\pi^{11}\beta_{\Delta}\Delta(z)$ $($remeber $\beta_{\Delta}$ was defined in \eqref{8}$)$. The proof of this fact depends on some special harmonic Maass forms which goes by the name **Maass-Poincaré series**. Let us not bother about the proof for a moment. Some of the coefficients $a_{\Delta}(n)$ computed numerically are   
$a_{\Delta}(1)=−73562460235.68364...$  $a_{\Delta}(2)=−929026615019.11308...$  $a_{\Delta}(3)=−8982427958440.32917...$  $a_{\Delta}(4)=−71877619168847.70781...$   
The coefficients seem to be irrational. It is time to disclose the intimate relation of these coefficients with Lehmer's conjecture.   
 
**Conjecture** $($Ken Ono$)$: The coefficients $a_{\Delta}(n)$ are irrational for every positive integer $n.$   
 
This conjecture implies the Lehmer's conjecture. Infact Lehmer's conjecture is implied by **any one** of the coefficients $a_{\Delta}(n)$ being irrational. Let me give some details. I will show that if $\tau(p)=0$ for some prime $p$ then all of the coefficients $a_{\Delta}(n)$ are rational. Now you can see why any of these coefficients being irrational implies the Lehmer's conjecture. Lets begin. Using \eqref{11} and the fact that $c_f^-(0)=0$ for the completion $f$ of the mock modular form$f^+=M_{\Delta}$, we have  
\begin{equation} \label{14}D^{11}\left(M_{\Delta}\right)(z)=\sum_{n=-1}^{\infty}n^{11}a_{\Delta}(n)q^n\end{equation}  is a weakly holomorphic modular form of weight $12.$ Next, Duke and Jenkins have constructed a basis for the space of weakly holomorphic modular forms using the Eisenstein series, discriminant function and the $j-$function defined by  \\[j(z)=\frac{E_4^3(z)}{\Delta(z)}=\frac{1}{q}+744+196884q+\dots.\\] The $j-$function transforms as weight $0$ modular form but is weakly holomorphic.  We don't need the complete details. Just take my word that using the results of Duke and Jenkins, we can write \begin{equation}\label{15}D^{11}\left(M_{\Delta}\right)(z)=a_{\Delta}(-1)\left[\Delta(z)\left(j^2(z)-1488j(z)+713304\right)\right]+a_{\Delta}(1)\Delta(z).\end{equation} One can easily prove that the $j-$function has integer Fourier coefficients so that $A(n)$ defined by  \\[\Delta(z)\left(j^2(z)-1488j(z)+713304\right)=\sum_{n=-1}^{\infty}A(n)q^n\\] are all **integers**. Comparing the Fourier coefficients from \eqref{14} and \eqref{15}, we get \begin{equation} \label{16}a_{\Delta}(n)=\frac{11!A(n)+a_{\Delta}(1)\tau(n)}{n^{11}}.\end{equation} Thus if $\tau(n)=0$ then \eqref{16} implies that $a_{\Delta}(n)$ is rational. Now suppose $\tau(p)=0$ for some prime $p$. Then using the Ramanujan's conjectures (a) and (c), we see that $\tau(p^kn)=0$ for every integer $k\geq 1$ and $n$ coprime to $p.$ This is our first result. Let us highlight it below:  

**Result 1:** If $\tau(p)=0$ for some prime $p$ then $a_{\Delta}(p^k n)$ is rational for every positive integer $k$ and $n$ coprime to $p$.

Now lets go back to Ono. Using Hecke theory, Ono shows that for every prime $p$, the Fourier series  
\\[\sum_{n=-p}^{\infty}\left(p^{11}a_{\Delta}(pn)-\tau(p)a_{\Delta}(n)+a_{\Delta}(n/p)\right)q^n\\]  is a weakly holomorphic modular form of weight $-10$ with **integer** Fourier coefficients. Here it is understood that $a_{\Delta}(n/p)=0$ if $n/p\not\in\mathbb{Z}.$ With $\tau(p)=0$, the $(np)^{\text{th}}$  Fourier coefficient of the above weakly holomorphic modular form is $p^{11}a_{\Delta}(p^2n)+a_{\Delta}(n)\in\mathbb{Z}.$ Now if $n$ is coprime to $p$ then Result 1 along with the fact that $p^{11}a_{\Delta}(p^2n)+a_{\Delta}(n)\in\mathbb{Z}$ implies that $a_{\Delta}(n)$ is rational. Thats it, we are done. Let us also highlight this below:  

 **Result 2:** If $\tau(p)=0$ for a prime $p$ then $a_{\Delta}(n)$ is rational for every integer $n$ coprime to $p.$
 
Let us now combine Result 1 and Result 2. We get the following theorem. 
 
**Theorem:** If $\tau(p)=0$ for some prime $p$ then $a_{\Delta}(n)$ is rational for every positive integer $n.$   

So we just need to show that any one of the coefficients $a_{\Delta}(n)$ defined in \eqref{13} is irrational to prove the Lehmer's conjecture. It seems that we have achieved something doable. Well, not quite. Showing that some number is irrational is equally difficult. For example the Euler-Macheroni constant is conjectured to be irrational but has not been proved to date. But we can end this section on a good note that atleast we have found new mathematics related to the old ones and this is the spirit of mathematics. You go on and on discovering the truths of nature and find more and more connections between virtually disconnected domains. 

### References   
The contents of the Introduction and many more results can be found in Chapter $2$ of $[1]$. A very nice introduction to modular forms and Hecke theory can be found in $[2]$. Some parts of the second section $($for example the infinite series for $\tau(n))$ and the contents of the third section is from $[3]$. Finally the missing proofs from the last section can be found in the papers $[4]$ and $[5]$. Happy reading!!

$[1]$ M. Ram Murty and V. Kumar Murty, _The Mathematical Legacy of Srinivasa Ramanujan_, Springer $(2013)$. 
 
$[2]$ M. Ram Murty, Michael Dewar and Hester Graves, _Problems in the Theory of Modular Forms_, Lecture notes in Mathematics, Springer $(2016)$.
  
$[3]$ Kathrin Bringmann, Amanda Folsom, Ken Ono and Larry Rolen, _Harmonic Maass Forms and Mock Modular Forms: Theory and Applications_, American Mathematical    Society, $(2017)$.  

$[4]$ Ken Ono, _A Mock Theta Function for Delta-Function_, Proceedings of the $2007$ Integers Conference.  

$[5]$ W. Duke, Paul Jenkins, _On the Zeros and Coefficients of Certain Weakly Holomorphic Modular Forms_, Pure and Applied Mathematics Quarterly, Volume $4$,      Number $4$, Pages $1327 − 1340$, $(2008)$.

